The project is concerned with the double Burnside ring of a finite
group G, its computation in concrete cases, and the development of a
general theory valid for all finite groups. The double Burnside ring
is an abstract associated to any finite group in a way that is best
explained after looking at the (plain) Burnside ring, a
well-studied tool for investigating a finite group.
Abstractly, B(G) is defined as the Grothendieck ring of the category
of finite G-sets. Through the connection between transitive G-actions
and the conjugacy classes of subgroups of G, the Burnside ring encodes
information about the subgroup structure and other
properties of the group. In a remarkable result from 1969, Dress has
characterized groups as solvable if and only if the spectrum of the
Burnside ring is connected.
The Burnside ring is a commutative semi-simple ring. In a concrete
fashion, B(G) can be constructed as a square matrix of non-negative
integers, called the 'table of marks' of G. This table of marks
becomes difficult to compute once G has a certain size. Algorithms
for the efficient computation of a table of marks, and hence the
Burnside ring of G were developed in recent years by the proposed
project supervisor and his collaborators. The GAP
system for computational discrete mathematics maintains and ships with
a database of known tables of marks of interesting groups.
The double Burnside ring B(G,G) of G is the Grothendieck ring of the
category of finite G,G-bisets. Here, a G,H-biset for two groups G and
H, is a set on which G acts from the left, and H acts from the right,
and the two actions commute. The ring B(G,G) has a lot in common with
the Burnside ring B(GxG) of the direct product of G with itself, but
it carries a different multiplication. In particular, B(G,G) is only
commutative if G is the trivial groups, and is only semi-simple if G
is cyclic.
The table of marks of GxG and its relation to B(G,G) have been studied
, and successfully applied to construct B(G,G) for the
symmetric group on three points. This small group G of size 6, so
far essentially the only non-abelian example of a faithful
representation of B(G,G) as a matrix ring.
The project objective is using and extending the tools developed
above(see arXiv:1704.03433 G.Pfeiffer, B. Masterson) , combining them with the results
from [1] focusing on
analyzing the structure of the double Burnside ring B(G,G) for more
and larger groups G. The collection of examples will be used to
develop the general structure theory of double Burnside rings.
As algebras in characteristic zero in general are not semi-simple,
double Burnside rings are interesting objects in their own right.
Also being important because of their relations to other branches of
algebra, such as the representation theory of finite groups.
[1] R. Boltje and S. Danz, A ghost algebra of the double Burnside algebra in
characteristic zero. J. Pure and Appl. Algebra 217 (2013), 608-635.






The project is designed in such a way that the standard methodologies of a computational
group theory project do apply.
The main idea here is to first translate results and techniques from the mathematical
literature into effective computer programs, within the existing framework of a computer
algebra system.
This step involves a review of the existing literature, as well as a review of computer
algebra systems and their fitness for purpose.
Next, the software tools developed in this step are applied to small examples, to test their
correctness and efficiency.
Then, larger examples are studied with the expectation to gain new general theoretical
insights.
Finally, any hypotheses and conjectures derived from those insights need to be justified
by a rigorous mathematical proof,which is then subjected to a peer review process.




The project requires specialist knowledge in abstract algebra and in computer algebra
software that can be used for the project.
The representation theory of finite groups and finite dimensional algebras is a powerful
and very refined algebraic theory.
The theory is not part of the undergraduate mathematics curriculum at Irish universities.
It is, however, easily accessible from basic knowledge in abstract algebra and in particular
group theory.




Year One will consist of an in-depth review of previously published literature on the theory
of Burnside Rings and its tables of marks.
In order to get to sufficient level needed to perform high quality research in abstract
algebra. I will be enrolled in specialist training as part of the structured PhD program in
NUI Galway, studying advanced topics in abstract algebra and representation theory of
finite groups. I must also learn a suitable software language on which to experiment
findings.
Risk is low in the first year as a wealth of existing literature is easily accessible. Although
the software required might not be publicly available.
Building on year one , the second year will focus primarily on software
design/development in order to recreate results from reviewed literature, and perform
experimentation on existing frameworks for generating tables of marks for finite groups of
small order.
Again low risk in this year, as examples are small and previously researched.
In the third year, we build on the examples generated in year two and our chosen software
setup in order to perform experiments on the theory of my project.
Generating new examples of table of marks for finite groups that have not been generated
previously. Therefore extending the theory of table of marks/double Burnside rings
significantly.
Risks in this year include providing sufficient proofs of theorems. As a result of this there is
no guarantee that proof of a general theorem can be found within a reasonable time
frame. As a result ,year three has much higher risks than previous.
However, this risk is mitigated by the fact that explicitly calculated examples are of interest
in their own right;
and any software developed, if properly packaged and documented, will be of use for the
general mathematical community.
The final year of this PhD project will be primarily in gathering all research done and
software created. Leading to writing a dissertation on the findings of my research.



NUI Galway lecturers are consistently among the best, and recognised through the
National Teaching Awards, and other award programmes.
Many high quality papers are published in the college of mathematics in NUIG. With a
significant portion of papers coming from my area of interest ,computational algebra. As a
consequence of this, NUI Galway has a number of experts in this field available to choose
from as potential supervisors.
A centre for fostering research mathematics exists here called the de Brún Centre for
Mathematics. The members of this group research in the following areas relevant to my
project: Computational homology,Representation theory, Computation with linear groups
and algebraic design theory. All promising modern fields of algebra.
The algebra cluster of the centre offers a wealth of experience and teaching from experts
in the field of algebra,geometry and their computational aspects along with a wide variety
of seminars and workshops from international experts. Including for example the annual
Groups in Galway conference.
This university is the ideal environment both academically and socially for doing a PhD
program




After discussing potential projects with many of the academic staff of this university. I
decided to work with Professor Gotz Pfeiffer.
Whose interests lie in Finite Groups, Representation Theory and Computer Algebra. And
is very well published in these fields, with particular interest in the Burnside ring of a finite
group and its table of marks.
See [1], [2], [3].
The proposed supervisor has also advised a recent PhD student who made significant
contributions to this field of research, see [3]. As someone driven to make a significant
advancement in the theory of Burnside rings and specifically the double Burnside ring, this
is the perfect supervisor for my PhD.
[1] G. Pfeiffer, The Subgroups of $M_{24}$ or How to Compute the Table
of Marks of a Finite Group. Experiment. Math. 6 (1997) 247-270.
[2] L. Naughton and G. Pfeiffer, Computing the Table of Marks of a
Cyclic Extension. Math.~Comp. 81 (2012), 2419-2438.
[3] B. Masterson and G. Pfeiffer, On the Table





The environment of the de Brun Centre for Mathematics at NUI Galway provides a range
of opportunities for knowledge dissemination. In regular reading groups and student
seminars, postgraduates can present to each other results from the existing literature as
well as results arising from their own research.
The annual Research Day of the School of Mathematics, Statistics and Applied
Mathematics includes a poster presentation for all research students of the school. The
conference Groups in Galway which is hosted each year by the de Brun Centre provides a
further opportunity for a poster presentation for an international audience, and a
conference talk for a PhD project that is complete or nearing completion.
This project's findings will also be presented at annual conferences outside Ireland, such
as the Postgraduate Group Theory Conference in the UK, and the Nikolaus Conference
on Computational Representation Theory in Aachen, Germany.
The theoretical results obtained from this project will be written up as mathematical
research papers in the final years of the project, to be published in leading mathematics
journals.
The software developed as part of the project will be made freely available as a
documented package for the GAP system.





This project resonated with me as an entryway to an untapped area of research allowing me to learn and work with all
forms of algebra and its structures.I wish to realise my potential for academic research and to contribute to this area of
mathematics. In both academia and industry, there is a desire for individuals with the ability to research problems and
present solutions. This PhD, will mature my ability to communicate and learn from a large spectrum of people building
the skill-sets necessary for the future.
I have undertaken research projects in the fields of mathematics and science,the first of which, as a sixteen year old in a
small team of students, Tasked originally with inventing a science based product with the potential to improve the lives of
the public in some way. The project targeted food safety. This task included individual creativity and research, seeing
what had been tried and failed, and subsequently analyzing these attempts. I learnt many skills : mathematical modeling,
statistical testing and the biology behind bacterial growth. Networking with professionals in the field & the biology and
chemistry faculty in NUIG, significant progress was made. We created a product that could signal accurately when food
has thawed and refrozen causing bacteria to spread and lie dormant. As a result, I achieved awards from the, Institute of
Physics Ireland, BT Young Scientist exhibition and Silver Crest for STEM research.
I also carried out an internship with the College of Mathematics in NUIG, the summer prior to final year. Consisting of
choosing a supervisor in my field of interest and agreeing on a project. I chose to work with abstract algebra. My project;
factorizing polynomials over Finite Fields using Berlekamp/Cantor-zassenhaus algorithms appealed to me because of
the modernity(1967/1981) and lack of previous research. I learned how research proposals are written. In order to
understand these algorithms, I learnt to navigate research paper databases and locate the specific material needed.
These papers were significantly denser than anything seen in my undergrad requiring techniques in reading and
processing information efficiently. I had acquired quite a knowledge of computer programming(python,Perl,c++,r etc) but
had not previously used software capable of working with abstract structures such as fields. My supervisor suggested
SageMath, I agreed. Having the ability to use and prototype new software quickly and perform complexity analysis to
compare effectiveness of each technique,this allowed me to immediately begin creating basic models of these
algorithms. Creating working prototypes of the algorithms, I found a way to document and publish in an easily accessible
way, by using git/github. It took many revisions to create documentation and technical specifications which adhered to
best practice.On completion, I presented my findings and research to a panel of lecturers in my university across many
fields of mathematics. These acquired skills will be invaluable in aiding me during the PhD.
Having a great interest in mathematics I wish